# MOD202: Packages

## Learning goals

1.  Implement a simple package using devtools and usethis
2.  Combine modularity, documentation, and validation using standardized tools 
3.  Develop confidence in creating re-usable code

Writing an R package sounds scary. The good news is a lot of industrious people have developed some really amazing tools for automating the boilerplate and letting you focus on the code. [Chapter 2](https://r-pkgs.org/whole-game.html) of the R Packages book walks you through the whole process start to finish in under an hour. Work through the tutorial in that chapter, then answer the following questions.

## Submit assignment

Open an issue in [FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci). Put "MOD202" in the title. In the comment, answer the following questions.

**Q1**

Congratulations! You wrote an R package. That's a really big deal! You're well on your way to writing easy-to-share code for your collaborators (which includes future you, they'll thank you I promise). This isn't actually a question, the instructors just want to you take a second to feel proud of yourself.

**Q2**

You just wrote some valuable documentation (DESCRIPTION file, Roxygen comments) and validation (testthat, R CMD CHECK) to go with your modular code (functions in R/). Following the R package convention requires more work up front to get started, but it grants you access to tools that depend on the standardized structure. What do you think about that trade-off? When do you think it might be warranted and when is it unnecessary busy work? No right answers here; the instructors are interested in your opinion at this stage.

**Q3**

Which steps in the process did you find most useful? Most confusing?
