# MOD201: Functional programming

## Learning goals

1.  Avoid loops with *vectorized* functions
2.  Replace loops with *functionals*
3.  Use *function shorthand* to write succinct functional calls

For this assignment, you'll submit a script that answers the questions below. Let's make sure it's a reproducible script! Your submission should run without errors on a fresh R session, which means you'll need to include appropriate function and variable definitions, as well as any necessary `library()` calls if you use a package.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Everything in R is a vector

### New vocabulary

-   *vectorization* Vectorized functions operate on all elements of a vector without needing to loop through and act on each element one at a time ([Software Carpentry](https://swcarpentry.github.io/r-novice-gapminder/09-vectorization/))

If R was your first programming language, the prevalence of vectors in R might already feel intuitive. But if you learned Python, Java, or another language first, this is probably an adjustment. Here's an example. Say you want the square roots of a sequence of numbers. A non-vectorized approach using a loop would look like this:

```r
x <- c(100, 81, 64, 49, 36)
x_sqrt <- x
for (i in seq_along(x)) {
  x_sqrt[i] <- sqrt(x[i])
}
```

But, like most functions in R, `sqrt()` is _vectorized_. This means we could replace all of the above with:

```r
x <- c(100, 81, 64, 49, 36)
x_sqrt <- sqrt(x)
```

That's much easier to read, and because it's more concise there are fewer opportunities for bugs to sneak in. What kind of functions are vectorized? 

Basic operators.

```r
# Increment by 1
0:3 + 1
# Double
0:3 * 2
# Square the first four whole numbers
(0:3)^2
# The first four powers of 2
2^(0:3)
# Comparisons
0:3 == 2
0:3 > 1
```

Mathematical functions.

```r
x <- (1:4)^2
sqrt(x)

y <- exp(0:3)
log(y)

theta <- seq(0, 2 * pi, by = pi / 4)
sin(theta)
cos(theta)
```

Pretty much everything, tbh.

```r
# Utility functions
weird_vector <- c(0.0, -1.0, NA, Inf)
is.numeric(weird_vector)
is.na(weird_vector)
is.finite(weird_vector)

# Dates and times 
# E.g., each day in the first month of 2000
as.POSIXct(0:30 * 24 * 3600, origin = "2000-01-01", tz = "UTC")

# Random variables. Multiple parameters are vectorized!
n <- 100
i <- 1:n
x <- rnorm(n, mean = 0, sd = 1)
y <- rnorm(n, mean = i, sd = 1)
z <- rnorm(n, mean = 0, sd = i)
# x is centered around 0 with no trend
plot(i, x)
abline(lm(x ~ i), col = "blue")
# y has an increasing mean with constant sd
plot(i, y)
abline(lm(y ~ i), col = "blue")
# z has a constant mean with increasing sd
plot(i, z)
abline(lm(z ~ i), col = "blue")
```

### Your turn

We're going to simulate the effect of heteroscedacity on ordinary least squares regression. If you haven't taken stats in a while, we're going to see what linear regression residuals look like if the error isn't constant. 

**Q1**

You have two random variables, `x` and `y`. The "true" relationship between these variables is y = 3x + 1 + epsilon. Simulate `y` using `rnorm()` and arithmetic. Hint: no vectorization needed for this step.

```r
n <- 100
x <- runif(n)
m <- 3
b <- 1
y <- m * x + b + ???

# Does the line approximate y = 3x + 1?
ggplot(tibble(x, y), aes(x, y)) + 
  geom_point() +
  geom_smooth(method = "lm") +
  theme_minimal()
# Are the residuals symmetrical?
ggplot(tibble(x, y_resid = resid(lm(y ~ x))), aes(x, y_resid)) + 
  geom_point() +
  geom_smooth(method = "loess") +
  theme_minimal()
```

**Q2**

Ok, now let's say y ~ x is heteroscedastic, i.e., the error isn't constant. Simulate `y` where the standard deviation of epsilon is equal to `x`. Hint: which parameter of `rnorm()` do you need to vectorize?

```r
y <- m * x + b + ???

# Does the line approximate y = 3x + 1?
ggplot(tibble(x, y), aes(x, y)) + 
  geom_point() +
  geom_smooth(method = "lm") +
  theme_minimal()
# Are the residuals symmetrical?
ggplot(tibble(x, y_resid = resid(lm(y ~ x))), aes(x, y_resid)) + 
  geom_point() +
  geom_smooth(method = "loess") +
  theme_minimal()
```

### Recap

All data in R are vectors. Almost all functions in R are vectorized. You can write simpler, bug-free code by using vectorized functions instead of loops.

It's important to note that **almost** all functions in R are vectorized. Some operations don't lend themselves to vectorization. In the next part of the lesson, you'll learn how to do more complex tasks using _functionals_.

But first, take a bio-break.

-----

## "Of course someone has to write loops. It doesn't have to be you."

_- Jenny Bryan_

### New vocabulary

-  _functionals_ a functional is a function that takes a function as an input and returns a vector as output. ([Advanced R](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/functionals.html))
-  _map_ Mapping a function onto a vector applies the function to each element of the vector.

_Note:_ Much of the content in this section is based on Jenny Bryan's excellent [purrr lessons](https://jennybc.github.io/purrr-tutorial/index.html).

### Modeling birds

To get a handle on functionals, we'll use the palmerpenguins dataset again.

```r
library(tidyverse)
library(palmerpenguins)
```

Let's figure out which structural measurement (bill length, bill depth, or flipper length) is the "best" predictor of body mass. We'll quantify "best" as the R^2 of an ordinary least squares regression. Here's the naive implementation.

```r
# Fit models
bill_length_mod <- lm(body_mass ~ bill_length, data = penguins)
bill_depth_mod <- lm(body_mass ~ bill_depth, data = penguins)
flipper_length_mod <- lm(body_mass ~ flipper_length, data = penguins)

# Extract R^2
bill_length_r2 <- summary(bill_length_mod)$r.squared
bill_depth_r2 <- summary(bill_depth_mod)$r.squared
flipper_length_r2 <- summary(flipper_length_mod)$r.squared

# Pick best
structure <- c("Bill length", "Bill depth", "Flipper length")
which_best <- which.max(c(bill_length_r2, bill_depth_r2, flipper_length_r2))
structure[which_best]
```

That's a lot of repeated code! And for only three options. As you might imagine, this naive approach won't cut it when you want to compare a lot of different models. So we'll break each step down into a function of it's own, then use a functional to _map_ to run the function on each option.

**Q3**

How would you write these functions?

```r
# Note: "data = penguins" means "set data to penguins if not specified"
# So calling `fit_model(form)` is the same as `fit_model(form, penguins)`
fit_model <- function(formula, data = penguins) {
  ???
}

extract_r2 <- function(model) {
  ???
}
```

Check your work. `extract_r2(fit_model(body_mass ~ bill_length))` should return 0.354 (roughly).

For the next step, we'll use `purrr::map()` (read as: "the map() function from the purrr package") to apply our functions to the structural options. `map()` takes the form of `map(YOUR_LIST, YOUR_FUNCTION)`. So if we start with a list of structural options:

```r
structural_options <- list(body_mass ~ bill_length,
                           body_mass ~ bill_depth,
                           body_mass ~ flipper_length)
```

Then this (non-functional) code:

```r
models <- list(fit_model(structural_options[[1]]),
               fit_model(structural_options[[2]]),
               fit_model(structural_options[[2]]))
```

And this (also non-functional) code:

```r
models <- list()
for (i in seq_along(structural_options)) {
  models[[i]] <- fit_model(structural_options[[i]])
}
```

Are both equivalent to this (functional) code:

```r
map(structural_options, fit_model)
```

**Q4**

Fill in the following to extract the R^2 values from your list of models.

```r
models <- map(structural_options, fit_model)
model_r2s <- ???
```

This example demonstrates how functionals can replace loops. In terms of cognitive load, the `map()` version has greater germane load, because it requires you to understand the fundamentals of functional programming. However, compared to the loop version, it has much less extrinsic load. The loop version requires more boilerplate. Declare your list first, define your loop, then run `fit_model()` on the proper input. Once you get a handle on functionals, you can make your code much more succinct, readable, and less buggy! (You might have noticed by now that's a recurring theme).

### Predictable types

Check the help page for `map()`. You'll see there are a lot of different versions. In addition to `map()`, there's `map_lgl()`, `map_chr()`, `map_int()`, and many others. The `map_*()` functions are modifications of `map()` that return a defined type. 

If you take a look at `model_r2s`, you'll see it's a list.

```r
model_r2s
typeof(model_r2s)
```

In R, lists are meant to hold complex objects, like models. R^2 values are not complex! They're just numbers. 

**Q5**

Read the help for `map()`. Which `map_*()` would you use to return a vector of numbers?

These typed versions of `map()` are extremely helpful, because they assure you're getting the output you expect. `map()` return a list, which can hold just about anything. You know "just about anything" includes? A lot of bugs. Notice the error message you get when you try to call `map_int()` on a function that returns something other than an integer.

```r
ith_letter <- function(i) {
  # LETTERS is a built-in vector with the letters of the alphabet.
  LETTERS[i]
}
map_int(1:4, ith_letter)
```

If you know you need an integer, `map_int()` will throw an explicit error message as soon as it encounters a non-integer. This is a great kind of error! If something's going to go wrong, you want to know as early as possible.

`map_dfr()` is a particularly interesting functional. In the same way the `int` in `map_int()` stands for "integer", `dfr` in `map_dfr()` stands for _D_ata _F_rame _R_ow-bind. `map_dfr()` assumes the function returns a data frame, which it binds together vertically. This is useful in a lot of different cases, such as reading and combining sheets in an Excel file.

[pcbi.0010010.xlsx](pcbi.0010010.xlsx) includes data from Ziemann, Eren, and El-Osta (2016), which is about errors in genomics papers caused by Excel mis-reading gene names as dates (pro-tip, never touch your data in Excel if you can help it). It has three sheets, which we want to combine into one data frame.

**Q6**

Download pcbi.0010010.xlsx into your working directory. Fill in the code below to create one data frame from three Excel sheets. 

```r
library(readxl)
sheet_names <- excel_sheets("pcbi.0010010.xlsx")
read_sheet <- function(???) {
  ???
}
pcbi_data <- map_dfr(???, ???)
```

Check your work. `nrow(pcbi_data)` should be 9652.

Bio-break!

-----

## Function shorthand

Often the function we want to map is very short, and it's kind of verbose to write a whole function. purrr (and other tidyverse packages) let you write functions in shorthand for brevity. Once again, this increases germane load in order to reduce extrinsic load. But once you get a handle on the lingo you'll appreciate how clean your code can look.

Let's simulate the central limit theorem. This is the theorem that says the distribution of sample means will approximate normality even if the underlying distribution isn't normal. We'll use the distribution of penguin bill lengths in the penguins dataset, which we know isn't normal because there are multiple species of different sizes. So for each trial we'll sample 30 bill lengths and take the mean. Over many trials, the means should take on a normal distribution. This is what that looks like without shorthand.

```r
# The QQ plot of penguin bill lengths shows non-normality
ggplot(penguins, aes(sample = bill_length_mm)) + 
  stat_qq() + 
  stat_qq_line(color = "red") + 
  theme_minimal()

# Function to run a trial once
# Note 1: this isn't a pure function. We'll fix that in the shorthand version.
# Note 2: a function used in a functional has to accept an argument, even if
# the function doesn't use it (as seen here). We'll fix that in the shorthand 
# version, too.
bill_length_trial <- function(trial) {
  mean(sample(penguins$bill_depth_mm, 30))
}

# Run 1000 trials
bill_length_samples <- purrr::map_dbl(1:1000, bill_length_trial)

# The QQ plot looks way better!
ggplot(tibble(bill_length_samples), aes(sample = bill_length_samples)) + 
  stat_qq() + 
  stat_qq_line(color = "red") + 
  theme_minimal()
```

Let's fix the two issues with `bill_length_trial()` using shorthand. Function shorthand takes the form of `~ some_expression(.x)`. The first key part is the `~`. That means formula notation (same as defining a regression model, for example), which purrr converts to a function. The second key part is `.x`. purrr treats `.x` as the parameter to the function. So `~ some_expression(.x)` is equivalent to:

```r
shorthand_function <- function(.x) {
  some_expression(.x)
}
```

**Q7** 

Re-write the bill length trial code using shorthand. _Hint_: `bill_length_trial()` doesn't actually need any input, so you won't need `.x`.

## Submit assignment

[Create a gist](https://docs.github.com/en/github/writing-on-github/editing-and-sharing-content-with-gists/creating-gists) from the script you wrote for this lesson. Open an issue in [FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci). Put "MOD201" in the title. In the comment, provide a link to your gist.

