# FP101: Choose study for replication

## Study Guidelines

Choose a study that you will replicate a figure or analysis from. A good study (and the corresponding figure or analysis) for replication will meet the following criteria:

- The requisite data, if any are needed, are available online and in a form which does not require significant pre-processing. If the code are available online, that's even better!
- The methods required to reproduce the figure can be completed in a week's work - i.e., they are described clearly, are relatively simple, and any statistical methods that are required are something you're familiar with - we don't want this to be an exercise in reading stats textbooks!
-  The paper and the figure / analysis you're reproducing is interesting to you! Coding is much more enjoyable when you're interested in what you're doing.

## Where to look

Finding studies that can be easily reproduced is surprisingly hard! You'll find that even most recent studies don't include the data needed to reproduce them, either in the supplemental, an online database, or the author's github pages. Even fewer studies will contain or link to code.

If you already have a study in mind, or if there's a researcher in your field that you know practices open science, try there first! Otherwise, just crawling through your paper library or google scholar can be pretty fruitless. Instead, try searching online data and code archives - in particular, [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/) and [Dryad](https://datadryad.org/stash), using the same terms you might use to look for papers.

If you're having trouble finding papers, ask one of the instructors for help, or try one of the options linked below!

## Submission Instructions

Open an issue and include a link to the study (and specific figure and/or analysis) you intend to replicate.

## A few options

Here are a few papers that we thought would be good candidates for this project. If any of them are interesting to you, feel free to choose one!

### Kolokotrones et al. 2010
[**Curvature in metabolic scaling**](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature08920)

**Summary:** It is widely assumed that basal metabolic rate increases with body mass according to a power law (i.e., linear on the log scale). The authors use data from >600 mammals to show that the relationship between body mass and basal metabolic rate is not log-linear, and thus is not best described by a simple power law relationship.

**Challenge:** Using the supplementary data, fit regression models with linear and quadratic effects of body mass on basal metabolic rate, excluding orcas and elephants. Plot the data and the resulting curves, with orca and elephants highlighted in the resulting plot and legend. Plot the resulting slopes as a function of body mass on a second panel.

### Pollock et al. 2014
[**Understanding co-occurrence by modelling species simultaneously with a Joint Species Distribution Model (JSDM)**](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/2041-210X.12180)

**Summary:** The authors outline one conceptual framework for jointly modeling the distributions of two or more species, allowing for shared responses to the environment and for positive / negative correlations among species ranges. 

**Challenge:** Reproduce figure 2 (or a panel from it). Figure 2 describes the “marginal” occurrence probabilities for two interacting species whose joint response to the environment is depicted using a bivariate normal distribution. This will require evaluating the density function for a bivariate normal distribution along different intervals, plotting density contours, and integrating icons into your plot.

### Grewelle et al. 2021
[**Redefining risk in data-poor fisheries**](https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12561)

**Summary:** The authors show that a non-parametric method used to rapidly assess the risk of species in data-poor fisheries performs poorly because it neglects to consider the spread of the null distribution of susceptibility scores, especially as the number of criteria used to evaluate the fishery increases. They develop a probabilistic model to overcome these shortcomings. 

**Challenge:** In figure 2, the authors use empirical data from ~170 fisheries to show that increasing the number of susceptibility attributes used to score fisheries results in clustering of the scores towards “middle risk” classifications. Use the data at https://github.com/grewelle/rPSA to reproduce this figure. This will require some data transformation, calculation of productivity and susceptibility scores from the equations provided in the paper (or using the functions provided on the github repository), and plotting of the 2-dimensional and marginal (1-dimensional) kernel densities of these scores.

### Powell et al. 2020.

[**Natural hybridization reveals incompatible alleles that cause melanoma in swordtail fishes**](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aba5216)

**Summary:** The authors show that certain incompatible allele combinations in natural hybrids between two species of swordtail fishes result in the development of melanoma on the caudal fin. 

**Challenge:** In Figure 1B, the authors show differences in the frequency of the melanoma precursor phenotype - the spotted caudal - between natural populations of pure parent species and their hybrids. Use the Supplementary data corresponding to Figure 1B to reproduce this plot and pairwise significance statistics presented in the paper.

### Hart et al. 2021.
[**High infectiousness immediately before COVID-19 symptom onset highlights the importance of continued contact tracing**](https://elifesciences.org/articles/65534)

**Summary:** The authors develop an approach to infer infectiousness of SARS-COV-2-infected individuals. They considered four models of infectiousness and fitted each to data from 191 SARS-CoV-2 transmission pairs collected from five different studies. The results suggest that there are a high proportion of presymptomatic transmissions among these data.

**Challenge:** Reproduce the distributions of epidemiological time intervals shown in Figure 2 using the data sheet linked by “Figure 2 - source data 1”.
