# FP301: Document your code

**Documentation** is an essential component of writing code that your colleagues, you, and especially your future self can use and understand. You're probably (hopefully!) used to documenting your code in at least one way - by leaving comments in your scripts or by embedding code in R markdown files or jupyter notebooks. This is a great place to start - it's a whole lot better than no documentation at all - but what about if someone else uses your code? Will these comments be as clear to them (or your future self) as they are to you now?

In this exercise, you're goal is to document your code so that it's easier for people (again, including yourself!) to find, read, and understand.

## Document your functions (with `Roxygen2`)

Use `Roxygen2` to document any functions you've written as part of your final project ([DOC201](../../jese4sci-DOC/lessons/DOC201.md)). If you haven't written any functions for the project, examine your code to see if there's anywhere you can de-spaghettify it, and write a function to do so ([MOD101](../../jese4sci-MOD/lessons/MOD101.md)/[MOD102](../../jese4sci-MOD/lessons/MOD102.md))!

## Create a README

Create a README for your R project (see [DOC102](../../jese4sci-DOC/lessons/DOC102.md)).

If your final project directory is an `rrtools` research compendium, it should include a template README.Rmd file that you can use to generate your README.md. Edit this .Rmd file with the information relevant to you and your final project, and knit the file to generate your README.

## Assignment

For this part of the final project, we're looking to see that you've incorporated **both a README and Roxygen-style comments** into your research compendium, and that you've translated your Roxygen-style comments into .Rd documentation.

Your assignment is to **submit an issue** with a link to your final project repository, with a README and properly documented functions. We should be able to clearly see both, because Roxygen2 will place your documentation in the `man` folder in your project directory, and the README will be clearly rendered on your repo's github page.
