# VAL202: Debugging techniques

## Learning goals

-  Describe a bug using a _reprex_
-  Find the location of a bug using a _callstack_
-  Step through buggy code with `browser()`

## Think like a scientist

As a biologist, you investigate questions about your study system by developing hypotheses and testing them with the simplest possible experiment. It's time you start treating debugging the same way. 

Watch Jenny Bryan's RSTUDIO::CONF 2020 keynote talk [_Object of type 'closure' is not subsettable_](https://www.rstudio.com/resources/rstudioconf-2020/object-of-type-closure-is-not-subsettable/) from 26:00 to 43:00. While you're watching, answer the following questions.

**Q1**

What is a _reprex_?

**Q2**

What does `traceback()` do?

**Q3**

What is a debugger and how do you trigger it?

## Your turn

Clone [bugswithbug](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/bugswithbug). This repo contains some of the data and code from [Yang et al. (2020)](https://doi.org/10.1002/ecy.3029), which is about bugs. _However_, the version of the code in this repository has a bug in it. If you run bug.R (`source("bug.R")`) you'll encounter the following error:

```r
Error in `$<-.data.frame`(`*tmp*`, start.date, value = numeric(0)) : 
  replacement has 0 rows, data has 108
```

Your task is to produce a reprex for this bug. bug.R relies on external data (the CSV files in directory 2014/) and most of the code is unrelated to the bug. Use the call stack and debugger to solve this mystery! Your final reprex should have the following properties.

1.  No external data dependencies (i.e., use built-in or dummy data)
2.  Produce the same error message
3.  No longer than 5 lines of code
