# DOC102: .Rmd READMEs

## Learning goals

1.  Describe the high-level information essential for a README
2.  Use literate programming to create a dynamic README file

## A one stop shop

### New vocabulary

-  _literate programming_ "Literate programming is a methodology that combines a programming language with a documentation language, thereby making programs more robust, more portable, more easily maintained, and arguably more fun to write than programs that are written only in a high-level language." (Knuth 1992)

### Why a README?

> A good rule of thumb is to assume that the information contained within the README will be the only documentation your users read.
(Lee 2018, p. 3)

> The goal of the `README.md` is to answer the following questions about your package:
> 
>  - Why should I use it?
>  - How do I use it?
>  - How do I get it?
_R Packages, 20.5.1_

Most people reading your code (including you in the future) will only read documentation as necessary. The intrepid scientist who carefully familiarizes themself with all your code's instructions before using it does not exist. Your README will be the first (and sometimes only) piece of documentation they see. It needs to contain enough information that someone won't get confused and give up, but not so much information that it becomes too dense to be useful. How do we strike the right balance?

Read [Chapter 20.5.1-20.5.2](https://r-pkgs.org/release.html#important-files) in the R Packages book. If you're not familiar with R Markdown, also read [Chapter 27](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/r-markdown.html) of the R for Data Science book.

## Your turn

### Critique a README

Pick an R package that's important to your work. Find the README for that package. For example, here's the [README for dbscan](https://github.com/mhahsler/dbscan). GitHub is a good place to look, as are CRAN and Bioconductor. How does the README address the following?
  
  - Why should I use it?
  - How do I use it?
  - How do I get it?

### Write a README

In this step, you'll write a README for a toy research compendium. [Fork](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo) the repository [FlukeAndFeather/simplerc](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/simplerc). Take a moment to familiarize yourself with the contents. This research compendium was created with rrtools, so it comes with a template README.Rmd. Use this template to write an effective README. Use literate programming, i.e., there should be code chunks that show how the functions in R/ work in practice. Hint: you can look at analysis/paper/paper.Rmd for examples.

## Submit assignment

Open an issue in [FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-DOC](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-DOC). Put "DOC102" in the title. In the comment, paste the answers from section "Critique a README" and provide a link to your forked repo from "Write a README".

## Bibliography

Knuth, D. E. (1992). Literate Programming. Centre for the Study of Language & Information.
