# DOC101: Share your notes

## Learning goals

1.  Define hierarchical levels of documentation
2.  Connect documentation types to audiences
3.  Develop familiarity with documentation vocabulary

## The who, how, and why of documentation

Documenting code is boring. There's now way around it. But you know what's even more boring? Wasting hours trying to figure out how an undocumented pile of code works! Documentation is the kind of book-keeping that most scientists know they _should_ do, but where to start? 

In this track, you'll build an mental model for the various levels of documentation and who they're intended for. You'll also learn how to use automated tools to reduce the time it takes to write documentation. When you complete this track, you'll know how to efficiently follow a documentation checklist, ensuring you, your collaborators, and your users know how your software (i.e., scientific analyses) work. 

Before continuing, watch the [accompanying lecture](https://vimeo.com/650880532).

### New vocabulary

-  _Application Programming Interface (API)_ A function-level description of how to use your code. The help files in R (e.g., `?sqrt`) are examples of API documentation.
-  _quickstart_ The set of instructions required to install and use your code for the simplest relevant task.
-  _README_ A single file your users can reference for understanding your code. The README should describe the motivation for your code, how to get started (e.g. a quickstart), and where to find more information. Implementation details should be left to the API documentation.

### Ten simple rules

Read [Lee (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006561) "Ten simple rules for documenting scientific software". The "Ten simple rules" series in PLOS Computational Biology is a great resource for scientists who want to write better code. After reading the article, follow the instructions below to submit your assignment. 

## Submit assignment

Open an issue in [FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-DOC](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-DOC). Put "DOC101" in the title. In the comment, answer the following questions.

1.  Order the following types of documentation from lowest- to highest-level. Briefly describe who the documentation is for and how they would use it.

  - API
  - README and quickstart guide
  - Comments

2. Think of a time you used someone else's code. How did you learn to use it? What types of documentation would have helped?

3. The code that accompanies scientific articles is often one long script (i.e., "spaghetti code"; see MOD101 for more details). What challenges do long, unstructured scripts present to writing effective documentation?
