# DOC201: APIs and roxygen2

## Learning goals

1.  Describe the low-level information essential for API documentation
2.  Use roxygen comments to write API documentation alongside functions

## Help!

API documentation is essential if you want other researchers to re-use your code. And keep in mind, "other researchers" includes you six months from now. 

If you're not familiar with the term "API" explicitly, you've definitely encountered it using R. Any time you call a function from a package, you're interacting with that package's API. And those convenient help pages (e.g., `?lm`)? That's API documentation. 

If you had to come up with your own system for documenting functions, you might be able to make the argument that API documentation is more effort than reward. However, the roxygen2 package provides tools and guidelines to streamline the process.

### How to use roxygen

Read [Chapter 10 (up to section 10.5)](https://r-pkgs.org/man.html) in the R packages book and [Chapter 7](https://style.tidyverse.org/documentation.html) of the tidyverse style guide (more on style guides in DOC202). Answer the following questions.

1.  Rule 2 from Lee (2018) was "Include examples (and lots of them)". This is common advice in software documentation. What roxygen keyword would you use to include examples with your API documentation?
2.  What roxygen keywords would you use to document function inputs and outputs?
3.  What's the RStudio shortcut for inserting a roxygen skeleton? What's the Rstudio shortcut for compiling documentation?

## Your turn

### Critique roxygen comments

Pick an R function that's important to your work. Find the roxygen comments for that function. For example, here are the [roxygen comments for lubridate::with_tz()](https://github.com/tidyverse/lubridate/blob/10731d1876f8cb902f01f8edb2810a09ce5784a4/R/time-zones.r#L1-L21). How does the API documentation address the following?
  
  - What are the inputs and outputs? Are the types (e.g., a numeric vector) specified? If there are size requirements (e.g., a 3x3 matrix), are they specified? Are there any ambiguities that could confuse a user? Think critically! This is the time to let out your inner pedantic nitpicker.
  - Are there examples? Are they runnable? Do they require any external data? If so, how is that handled?

### Write roxygen comments

In this step, you'll add roxygen comments to a toy research compendium. If you did DOC102, you should already have a fork of simplerc. Otherwise, [fork](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo) the repository [FlukeAndFeather/simplerc](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/simplerc). There are three functions in the R/ directory. Write roxygen comments for each.

## Submit assignment

Open an issue in [FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-DOC](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-DOC). Put "DOC201" in the title. In the comment, paste the answers from sections "How to use roxygen" and "Critique roxygen comments". Provide a link to your forked repo from "Write roxygen comments".
