# DOC202: Code style

## Learning goals

1.  Use a style guide to write consistent, easy-to-read code

## Strunk and White for code

If you took an undergraduate writing course, you probably encountered Strunk and White's Elements of Style. It's a manual for writing clearly in English. Inside you'll find useful advice for multiple levels of organization. At the sentence level: "Do not join independent clauses by a comma." At the paragraph level: "As a rule, begin each paragraph with a topic sentence." If you follow these rules, your writing should improve. 

Similar style guides exist for code. They also provide guidelines at multiple levels of organization: line-by-line syntax, functions, and files. When you adhere to a style guide, the presentation of your code immediately becomes much more consistent. This reduces the cognitive load for anyone reading your code (this includes future you!) and focuses them on the logic at hand.

As Christian Maioli Mackeprang wrote in a [blog post](https://chrismm.com/blog/writing-good-code-reduce-the-cognitive-load):

> **Keep your personal quirks out of it**
>
> You read some article which blows your mind with new tricks. Now you are going to write clever code and all your peers will be impressed.
>
> The problem is that people just want to fix their bugs and move on. Your clever trick is often nothing more than a distraction. As I talked about in “Applying neuroscience to software development“, when people have to digest your piece of code, their “mental stack” fills up and it is hard to make progress.

### A style guide for R

The [tidyverse style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org) is a widely-used style guide. Read chapters 2-4 (don't worry, they're short) on syntax, functions, and pipes. Answer the following questions.

1.  What's the limit on characters per line?
2.  How does the following code violate the style guide?
  ```r
  polgyon_degrees <- function(n_sides) {
    return((n_sides - 2) * 180)
  }
  ```
3.  Fix this code.
  ```r
  library(tidyverse)
  airquality_summary <- airquality %>% 
    drop_na %>% 
    mutate(Temp = (Temp - 32) * 5/9) %>% group_by(Month) %>% 
    summarize(mean_temp_C = mean(Temp, na.rm = TRUE), sd_temp_C = sd(Temp, na.rm = TRUE))
  ```

## Your turn

Choose a piece of code. This could be an analysis you wrote, code associated with a paper you read, or source code for a package you use. Re-write the code following the tidyverse style guide.

## Submit assignment

Open an issue in [FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-DOC](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-DOC). Put "DOC202" in the title. In the comment, paste the answers from section "A style guide for R". Provide links to the original and revised code from section "Your turn". Use [gists](https://docs.github.com/en/github/writing-on-github/editing-and-sharing-content-with-gists/creating-gists) as necessary.
