# RC201: `rrtools` exercise

## Learning goals

1.  Combine data, code, and manuscript in a *research compendium*
2.  Follow software conventions to take advantage of existing tools
3.  Introduction to how the core concepts of modularity, documentation, and validation fit together

## Working example

*Why aren't the largest animals the fastest?* A horse is faster than a dog is faster than a mouse. As anyone who's gone for a walk with a taller friend knows, larger body sizes have biomechanical advantages for increased speed. However, the trend reverses at extremely large body sizes (e.g., an elephant is slower than a giraffe is slower than a horse). [Hirt et al. (2017)](Hirt%20et%20al.%20(2018).pdf) present a model from physical first principles for explaining this pattern. In this exercise, we will replicate one of their figures in a **research compendium**.

## Exercise

### 1. Create a repository

1.  Sign into [github.com](http://github.com) and create a new repository called "maxspeed".
2.  In RStudio, create a new project from version control (File \> New Project \> Version Control \> Git). Fill in the repository URL to match your new repository on GitHub (www.github.com/*yourusername*/maxspeed.git). This should automatically call the project directory "maxspeed". Pick any subdirectory you like (\~/Documents/GitHub is the default in most cases).

### 2. Create a research compendium

0.  Check your version of the usethis package (`packageVersion("usethis")`). If it's <2.0.0, you'll need to update it. Restart your R session, run `install.packages("usethis")`, then restart R again. There's a bug in rrtools associated with earlier versions of usethis.

1.  At the R console, enter `rrtools::create_compendium()`. Confirm you want to overwrite the .Rproj file. RStudio will restart.
    
    *Windows users:* You have an extra step. `rrtools::create_compendium()` creates a file, .Rprofile, that is supposed to run once then delete itself. Windows prevents that from happening. So you'll need to close RStudio, open Windows Explorer, navigate to the directory with your research compendium, and delete .Rprofile. If you don't see it listed, make sure you have [hidden files visible](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/view-hidden-files-and-folders-in-windows-97fbc472-c603-9d90-91d0-1166d1d9f4b5).

2.  After RStudio restarts, take a minute to browse the new files. In particular, make note of DESCRIPTION, README.Rmd, and analysis/paper/paper.Rmd.

3.  Commit and push to save your changes and push them to GitHub. Switch to the Git tab in RStudio, check all the boxes next to the files (the orange "?"s should turn into green "A"s), and click "Commit". Enter "initial commit" in the commit message and hit Commit. Then hit Push. Commit creates a local checkpoint of your changes and Push uploads it to the server.

4.  Return to your repo's page on GitHub (www.github.com/*yourusername*/maxspeed) and refresh. You should now see a list of files and an analysis/ folder.

### 3. Add data

1.  Download [maxspeeddatabase.xlsx](maxspeeddatabase.xlsx) and put it in analysis/data/raw_data.

2.  Create an R script: analysis/data/derived_data/read_maxspddb.R. Add the following code:

    ``` {.r}
    readxl::read_excel("analysis/data/raw_data/maxspeeddatabase.xlsx") %>%
      dplyr::rename(tax_grp = `taxonomic group`,
                    locomotion = `locomotion mode`,
                    mass_kg = `body mass [kg]`,
                    mass_ref = `mass ref.`,
                    max_spd_kmh = `max. speed [km/h]`,
                    speed_ref = `speed ref.`,
                    diet = `primary diet`) %>%
      saveRDS("analysis/data/derived_data/maxspeed.RDS")
    ```

3.  Source analysis/data/derived_data/read_maxspddb.R, which creates the data file analysis/data/derived_data/maxspeed.RDS.

4.  analysis/data/derived_data/read_maxspddb.R uses functions from the readxl and dplyr packages. We need to keep track of these dependencies! Run the following at the console:

``` {.r}
library(devtools)
use_package("readxl")
use_package("dplyr")
```

Notice readxl and dplyr are now listed under "Imports" in the DESCRIPTION file. We'll cover the details of the DESCRIPTION file in another lesson.

### 4. Add functions

1.  Hirt et al. (2017) proposed a non-linear model for predicting maximum speed from body size. We'll fit that model to multiple subsets of the maximum speed database (e.g. by locomotion mode: running, swimming, flying). Any time we repeat a task more than twice, it's probably a good idea to put it in a function.
2.  Call `use_r("speed_model")`. This creates a file, R/speed_model.R, where you'll add functions related to the speed model.
3.  Create a function for fitting the model. Copy the following functions `fit_maxspeed()` and `predict_maxspeed()` into R/speed_model.R. Don't worry if the code is confusing right now, you'll learn more about writing functions in the Modularity track.

``` {.r}
#' Fit time-dependent maximum speed model
#'
#' @param dat `[data.frame]` Subset of the maximum speed database. Requires columns `max_spd_kmh` and `mass_kg`.
#'
#' @return `[nls]` A fitted non-linear regression model.
#' @export
fit_maxspeed <- function(dat) {
  # Numerical methods sometimes fail to fit the model, so just keep trying until
  # it works
  tryCatch({
    stats::nls(
      formula = max_spd_kmh ~ a * mass_kg^b * (1 - exp(-h * mass_kg^i)),
      data = dat,
      start = list(a = runif(1, 11.2 - 0.91, 142.8 + 16.7),
                   b = runif(1, 0.24 - 0.01, 0.36 + 0.02),
                   h = runif(1, 2.4 - 1.4, 19.5 + 13.6),
                   i = runif(1, -0.72 - 0.26, -0.56 + 0.07))
    )},
    error = function(e) fit_maxspeed(dat)
  )
}

#' Maximum speed predictions
#'
#' @param mass_kg `[numeric]` Mass of animals for model prediction (in kg)
#' @param mod `[nls]` A fitted time-dependent maximum speed model (see `fit_maxspeed()`)
#'
#' @return `[numeric]` Predicted maximum speeds for animals of size `mass_kg`
#' @export
predict_maxspeed <- function(mass_kg, mod) {
  stats::predict(mod, newdata = data.frame(mass_kg = mass_kg))
}
```

4.  The comments preceding each function that start with `#'` will produce help files for each function. You'll learn more about them in the Documentation track. For now, hit Ctrl/Cmd-Shift-D to generate documentation. You can see what an example with `?fit_maxspeed`.
5.  Now's a good time to commit your changes.

### 5. Create a figure

1.  Time to use those functions to replicate figure 2a from Hirt et al. (2017). Open analysis/paper/paper.Rmd.

2.  Under `# Results`, add a code chunk to load the data and required packages.

        ```{r load}
        library(maxspeed)
        library(dplyr)
        library(ggplot2)
        maxspeed <- readRDS("../data/derived_data/maxspeed.RDS")
        ``` 

3.  Keep track of your dependencies! At the console, run `use_package("dplyr")` and `use_package("ggplot2")`.

4.  Add a code chunk to generate the figure

        ```{r fig2a}
        palette <- list(green = "#83CE3D",
                        orange = "#E39F2F",
                        blue = "#5F9FA1")

        fly_dat <- filter(maxspeed, locomotion == "flying")
        fly_model <- fit_maxspeed(fly_dat)
        fly_spd <- tibble(
          mass_kg = seq(min(fly_dat$mass_kg), max(fly_dat$mass_kg), length.out = 1000),
          max_spd_kmh = predict_maxspeed(mass_kg, fly_model)
        )

        run_dat <- filter(maxspeed, locomotion == "running")
        run_model <- fit_maxspeed(run_dat)
        run_spd <- tibble(
          mass_kg = seq(min(run_dat$mass_kg), max(run_dat$mass_kg), length.out = 1000),
          max_spd_kmh = predict_maxspeed(mass_kg, run_model)
        )

        swm_dat <- filter(maxspeed, locomotion == "swimming")
        swm_model <- fit_maxspeed(swm_dat)
        swm_spd <- tibble(
          mass_kg = seq(min(swm_dat$mass_kg), max(swm_dat$mass_kg), length.out = 1000),
          max_spd_kmh = predict_maxspeed(mass_kg, swm_model)
        )

        ggplot(fly_dat, aes(x = mass_kg, y = max_spd_kmh)) +
          geom_point(color = palette$green, size = 0.5, shape = 15) +
          geom_point(data = run_dat, color = palette$orange, size = 0.5, shape = 16) +
          geom_point(data = swm_dat, color = palette$blue, size = 0.5, shape = 17) +
          geom_line(data = fly_spd, 
                    color = palette$green, 
                    size = 1.25) +
          geom_line(data = fly_spd, 
                    color = "white", 
                    size = 0.5) +
          geom_line(data = run_spd, 
                    color = palette$orange, 
                    size = 1.25) +
          geom_line(data = run_spd, 
                    color = "white", 
                    size = 0.5) +
          geom_line(data = swm_spd, 
                    color = palette$blue, 
                    size = 1.25) +
          geom_line(data = swm_spd, 
                    color = "white", 
                    size = 0.5) +
          scale_x_log10("Body mass (kg)",
                        limits = 10^c(-10, 7),
                        breaks = 10^c(-10, -6, -2, 1, 4, 7),
                        labels = scales::trans_format("log10", scales::math_format(10^.x))) +
          scale_y_log10(bquote(Speed~(km~h^-1)),
                        limits = 10^c(-2, 3),
                        breaks = 10^(-2:3),
                        labels = c("0.01", "0.1", "1", "10", "100", "1,000")) +
          annotation_logticks() +
          theme_classic() +
          theme(aspect.ratio = 1)
        ```

5.  Click Knit on the toolbar above the Rmd file. This generates a Word document with the figure you created.

6.  Commit your changes and push to GitHub.

### 6. Add citations and cross-references

RStudio has a visual editing mode that automates many of the more tedious technical writing tasks, like tracking citations and cross-referencing figures.

1.  Change your citation style to Nature, to match Hirt et al. (2017). Download the Nature [Citation Style Language](https://citationstyles.org/authors/) (CSL) file from the official CSL repository on GitHub ([link](https://github.com/citation-style-language/styles/blob/master/nature.csl)). This file makes your citations and bibliography match Nature's preferences. Put the file in analysis/templates. Then, update your paper.Rmd YAML header to use the new CSL file. Around line 25, you should see `csl: "../templates/journal-of-archaeological-science.csl"`. Change `journal-of-archaeological-science` to `nature`.
2.  Add a citation. Switch to [visual editing mode](https://rstudio.github.io/visual-markdown-editing/) and delete the default bib file (analysis/paper/references.bib). In the `# Introduction` there should be a line that says `Here is a citation [@Marwick2017]` (around line 60). Erase that and replace it with `This is a replication of figure 2A from`. Now we're going to add a citation to Hirt et al. (2017). At the end of the sentence you just added, type `[@` . This should bring up a prompt that says "\|magnifying glass\| or DOI". Paste the DOI for Hirt et al. (2017): 10.1038/s41559-017-0241-4. That should launch a dialog with the bibliographic information. Hit OK. Your citation should now look like `[@hirt2017]` .
3.  Have a look at the result. Open analysis/paper/references.bib and you should see the bib entry for Hirt et al. (2017). Switch back to paper.Rmd and knit the document. In Word, at the beginning of the introduction (line 10), you'll see Hirt et al. (2017) cited. Scroll down to the references section and you'll see the full bibliographic entry (should be on line 25). Well done! For more information on citations in Rmd documents, see [here](https://rstudio.github.io/visual-markdown-editing/citations.html).
4.  Commit your changes!
5.  Now let's cross-reference the figure. First, you'll need to add a caption. Find the R chunk with the figure code. It should have the chunk label `fig2a` (i.e., it starts with `{r fig2a}`. Add a caption with the `fig.cap` option (e.g., `{r fig2a, fig.cap="Replication of figure 2a from [@hirt2017]"})`. Knit the document and check out the caption below the figure.
6.  Now that the figure has a caption, it's available for cross-reference. Scroll back to the Introduction in the Rmd file. At the end of the sentence starting with "This is a...", type `(Fig. @ref(fig`. You should see an autocomplete box; hit enter or return to accept the first option, which should be `fig:fig2a`. Add any necessary punctuation so the sentence make sense, then knit. You should now see your figure properly cross-referenced! More information about cross-referencing for other types of objects (e.g., tables, equations) is available [here](https://rstudio.github.io/visual-markdown-editing/technical.html#cross-references) and [here](https://bookdown.org/yihui/bookdown/cross-references.html).
7.  Commit your changes and push to GitHub.

### 7. Wrapping up

Do as much as the following as time allows.

1.  Update the DESCRIPTION file. Read [Chapter 8](https://r-pkgs.org/description.html) of the R packages book and update all the fields you can (Title, Description, etc).
2.  Add a license. Read [Chapter 9](https://r-pkgs.org/license.html) of the R packages book and add an MIT license.
3.  Update the README. Read [Chapter 20.5](https://r-pkgs.org/release.html?q=readme#readme) of the R packages book. Update README.Rmd and knit.
4.  Update analysis/paper/paper.Rmd. Add your information to the YAML header (the first 30ish lines, with `---` before and after it). Remove the default template R code chunks that are unrelated to replicating Hirt et al. (2017) (e.g., the chunk that creates the scatter plot). Knit to update the Word document.
5.  Commit and push.

### 8. Submit assignment

[Open an issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/quickstart) in [FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-RC](https://github.com/FlukeAndFeather/jese4sci-RC). Put "RC201" in the title. In the comment, leave a link to your `maxspeed` repo.
